
# Ordinary world

## Mulan

Honor is vital in Mulan. As Mulan dishonours her family, she does not fit into
the traditional female values that all must adhere to. Mulan is also clumsy and
embarrasses herself, which also both go against the values.

## Odyssey

King Odysseus is at home in Ithaca, with his wife, Penelope, and newborn son,
Telemachus. The King is well-liked and respected, which give him pride and
happiness.

## Comparison

While Odysseus is full of pride and honor, and is respected by his people,
Mulan is clumsy and is not respected by her her family. These are polar
opposites already.

# Call to adventure

## Mulan

Mulan witnesses her father being conscripted, and immediately realises that he
will die in war. She decides to disguise herself as a male to save her father.

## Odyssey

Odysseus sets out for the war in Troy.

## Comparison

Odysseus' motivation is to save his people, while Mulan's motivation for
adventure is saving her father.

# Refusal of the call

## Mulan

Mulan doubts her disguising abilities and almost gives up in front of the
training camp, but Mushu convinces her to go, despite her fears that she will
be uncovered.

## Odyssey

Odysseus does not want to leave his family and sail to Troy because he knows it
will be a long trip. He worried that something bad might occur during his trip.

## Comparison

While Mulan fears for herself, the confident Odysseus fears for others. This
clearly demonstrates that Odysseus believes in himself, while Mulan does not.

# Meeting with the mentor

## Mulan

The captain fills the role of the Mentor in Mulan, who is inspired by his
ridiculing of the soldiers to improve her battle skills and not fall behind the
others. She is determined to excel in the new life that she has found.

## Odyssey

Athena, the goddess of wisdom, crafts, and battle is Odysseus' guide. Sh wants
to help Odysseus, though she has been instructed not to by the other gods. She
takes pity on him while other gods forsake Odysseus for this very reason.
Athena constantly saves him from death while giving him guidance.

## Comparison

Mulan does not have a person that constantly guards her, while Odysseus does.
This may be an indication that Odysseus' struggles will be so much more
difficult that he needs others to guard him, unlike Mulan whose childish little
"adventures" do not really amount to much.

# Crossing the threshold

## Mulan

After getting into he swing of things and getting better and better at being
a warrior, Mulan comes to be respected by the others in the army for her skill
and sportsmanship.

## Odyssey

After the war, the gods become angry with the Greeks for their prideful ways.
Indeed, the gods are *so* angry that they form a great storm which emerges and
throws the Greeks off course. The gods sure do hate those Greeks!

## Comparison

Odysseus and his crew do not really have a real threshold to cross, while Mulan
does. The fact that the Odyssey does *not* have a threshold might signal that
the threshold is so drawn out that it isn't noticed. The threshold being drawn
out may also suggest that the rest of the journey will be more laborious and
arduous.

# Tests, allies, enemies

## Mulan

Mulan improves her skills and becomes even better at being male in a montage
with a catchy song that Harrison seems to really enjoy (*Let's get down to
buissness---To defeat---The Huns!*)


## Odyssey

Odysseus is faced with many tests as he travels back to Ithaca which include
many of the famous and well-known Greek mythological creatures in popular
culture. This list of creatures includes the Lotus Eaters, the Sirens and also
Scylla.

## Comparison

The fact that Mulan had to endure only vague "montage-y" tests, allies, enemies
in the form of training implies that Mulan's journey will be soft and easy.
This is in direct contrast to the Odyssey's journey, which has real
life-or-death scenarios, and is more serious than the tests found in Mulan.

# Approach to the innermost cave

## Mulan

The army that Mulan is a part of travels to a village the Huns decimated after
being tricked by Mushu into going to war with the Huns.

## Odyssey

Odysseus nearly makes it home, but unfortunately for him and his crew they open
a bag that had been given to Odysseus by Aeolus, god of the winds. The bag
released a wind that blew them far away from Ithaca after it was sadly opened.

## Comparison

The Approach is much more subdued in Mulan, and feels "set" and "official" due
to the government involvement in the whole situation. The very fact that the
military is involved in an organised and official manner subdues the entire
situation because it feels  like the government is keeping everyone safe. The
Odyssey's Approach could not be a more direct polar opposite to the one found
in Mulan. It is spontaneous, surprising, and completely unregulated. It is also
more dangerous, which sets the tone for the Supreme Ordeal that lies ahead.

# Supreme ordeal

## Mulan

- Army is ambushed by the Huns who are hiding behind the summit of the mountain

- All hope is lost

- Mulan saves everyone by firing a rocket into an overhang of snow, causing an
  avalanche

- She kills almost everyone, but some of the army survive

- The rest of the army realises that Mulan is female after undressing her to
  tend to a wound she had sustained

## Odyssey

- Odysseus is sent to the underworld seeking information to guide him home

- This quest brings him to the verge of death

## Comparison

- Mulan

    - Sustains little damage

- Odyssey

    - Sustains comparatively huge personal damage

- In general much more extreme storyline in the Odyssey

# Reward

## Mulan

- Instead of the reward going to the hero, it goes to the others in the army
  after they realise Mulan is female

- The reward consists of beating the Huns and not perishing

- Mulan is left to die in the snow with Mushu, the cricket and her horse

## Odyssey

- The King of Phaeacia gives Odysseus passage home

## Comparison

- Mulan

    - Reward is vague

    - Cannot really be classified as reward

- Odyssey

    - Powerful kings of faraway lands lead the classic hero home

    - I like it!

    - More epic in general

# The road back

## Mulan

- Mulan realises most of the Huns did not die in the avalanche after all
  
- Decides to make her way towards the Imperial Palace

- Decides that she is obligated to save China, instead of just going home

- Mulan arrives at the Imperial palace and attempts to convince the others that
  the Huns are in fact not dead, and that they are there, trying to lertmurder
  the Emperor

## Odyssey

- Unlike other heroes, Odysseus was not in search of treasure

- Instead, he was desperately trying to reach his home

- Once he returns, he finds out that his house has been overrun with suitors
  trying to steal his wife and palace

## Comparison

- Mulan

    - In this case, Mulan's story is much more dramatic and heroic

    - Trying to save China!

- Odyssey

    - Much more noble

    - Not as dramatic

    - Lower stakes

# Resurrection

## Mulan

- No one believes her, because they believe that Mulan cannot be trusted as she
  had already lied to them before

- The Huns reveal themselves, and the remaining members of the army, directed
  by the captain, attempt to ram the Imperial Palace's doors open, to no avail

- Mulan eventually convinces all members of the army to join her in her plan to
  disguise themselves as women

- Mulan's plan succeeds, and she is rewarded by the Emperor by being offered
  a seat on the Imperial Council, which she declines

## Odyssey

- Instead of rushing in and killing the suitors, Odysseus is patient

- He wishes to learn if his wife has been faithful

- With the help of his son and a loyal swineherd, he devises a plan

- Athena disguises him as an old beggar so that he can enter his house
  undetected

- Telemachus steals all the suitorsâ€™ weapons, and a final test is proposed

- Penelope will marry the man who strings Odysseus' bow and shoots an arrow
  through a line of small circles; a seemingly impossible task

## Comparison

- Mulan

    - Much more dramatic

    - Not very patient or mature

- Odyssey

    - Very mature way to handle situation

    - Cunning

- Implies that Odysseus is mature and clever, while Mulan's plan is just brute
  force with a bit of disguising

# Return with the elixir

## Mulan

- Instead, the Emperor hands Mulan a sword and a necklace

- Mulan returns home with the captain in tow to the delight of her family

- Mulan's family is also impressed with the gifts Mulan received

## Odyssey

- Odysseus, still dressed as a beggar, completes the task and is restored to
  his original state

- He and his son expel the suitors from their home by force

- Penelope, seeing how Odysseus has changed, tests him to make sure it is
  actually him

- She tells him she moved their bed

- He replies, correctly, that this would have been impossible, and all is
  returned to normal

## Comparison

- Both noble and dramatic

- Odyssey slightly more dramatic IMHO

- Mulan scenario very unrealistic

- Assuming all mystical creatures are real, Odyssey scenario quite realistic

# Archetypes

## The Shadow

- Odyssey has Poseidon

    - Poseidon conforms to his archetype as he always creates trouble to
      Odysseus

- The Shadow in Mulan is Shang Yu

    - Shang Yu conforms to his archetype as he is the leader of the Huns

## Similarities

- Both of the characters are villains

- In the Odyssey, Poseidon isn't the main threat to Odysseus

- The main problem is the war

    - But Poseidon still causes trouble throughout the journey

- Poseidon is more cunning and mischievous in comparison to a big, more
  traditional villain like Shang Yu

## The Hero(ine)

- The hero in Odyssey is main saver of the story

- The heroine in Mulan is Mulan

    - Mulan conforms to her archetype by saving the whole of China

## Similarities

- Mulan is introduced as a free-spirited outcast, clumsy, and unable to follow
  rules, regulations, or traditions
  
- Nevertheless, she has a warm heart and wants nothing more than to uphold her
  family honor, while keeping true to herself

- Odysseus has two major flaws:

    - Arrogance

    - Pride

- In comparison, Mulan is very selfless and puts others before her

## The Hermit/ Helper/ Mentor

- The helper in Odyssey is Goddess Athena

    - She conforms to her archetype by helping through the journey

- The helper in Mulan is Mushu

    - Mushu conforms to his archetype as he guides her and convinces her to not
      give up

## Similarities

- The characters in each movie and book help the protagonist.

- In the movie Mulan, Mushu helps her by cheering her spirit and gives her
  confidence

- In comparison, Athena in the Odyssey, sends him divine aid and help

## The Dream Person

- The dream person in Odyssey is Penelope

    - She conforms to the archetype as she is married to Odysseus

- The dream person in Mulan is the Captain

    - He conforms to the archetype as Mulan and the Captain like each other

## Similarities

- In comparison, Odysseus is married to Penelope whereas Mulan and the Captain
  aren't

## The Threshold Guardian(s)

- The threshold guardians in Odyssey are the Lotus Eaters

    - They test Odysseus' strength and ability to problem solve by making his
      men forget about home.

- The threshold guardians in Mulan are the ancestors

    - They conform to the archetype as they are not real people and guide Mushu
      to help Mulan

## Similarities

- In Mulan, the threshold guardians want to bring her back to not fight for the
  war

- In comparison, the Lotus Eaters are native to their land and help the Odyssey
  crew with the 'lotus' fruits

## The Tricker

- The tricker in Odyssey is Poseidon

    - Poseidon conforms to the archetype by tricking Odysseus through the
      adventure

- The tricker in Mulan is Mushu

    - Mushu conforms to the archetype by lying to the consul

## Similarities

- In Mulan, Mushu tricks the consul to go to war

- Mushu doesn't harm Mulan in any way

- In comparison, Poseidon tricks Odysseus many times by getting him into
  frustrating situations

## The Herald

- The herald in the Odyssey is the starting of the war in Troy

    - This conforms to the archetype because it tells Odysseus to go to war

- The herald in Mulan is Mushu and the Consul of the Emperor

    - He conforms to the archetype by telling the "news" to the Captain

## Similarities

- In Mulan, Mushu lied about going to war; the news was fake

- In Odyssey, the starting of the war warned everyone to stay 
